 Harriet Vane - Wikipedia Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Character biography 2 Fictional works by Harriet Vane 3 Influences 4 Bibliography Toggle Bibliography subsection 4.1 Books by Dorothy L. Sayers 4.2 Books by Jill Paton Walsh 5 Portrayal in film, TV or theatre 6 References Toggle the table of contents Harriet Vane Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Switch to legacy parser Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Fictional character by Dorothy L. Sayers This article needs more citations . Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed . Find sources: "Harriet Vane" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( December 2020 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Fictional character Harriet Deborah Vane First appearance Strong Poison (1930) Last appearance The Late Scholar (2013) Created by Dorothy L. Sayers Portrayed by Constance Cummings (1940) Sarah Badel (1983) Harriet Walter (1987) Emily Richard (1988) Voiced by Anne Bell (1976) Maria Aitken (1981) Joanna David (2005) In-universe information Gender Female Occupation Author of detective stories Spouse Lord Peter Wimsey Children Bredon Wimsey (son) Roger Wimsey (son) Paul Wimsey (son) (possibly two more) Nationality British Harriet Deborah Vane , later Lady Peter Wimsey , is a fictional character in the works of British writer Dorothy L. Sayers (1893–1957) and the sequels by Jill Paton Walsh . Vane, a mystery writer, initially meets Lord Peter Wimsey while she is on trial for poisoning her lover ( Strong Poison ). The detective falls in love with her and proposes marriage, but she refuses to begin a relationship with him, traumatised as she is by her dead lover's treatment of her and her recent ordeal. In Have His Carcase , she collaborates with Wimsey to solve a murder but refuses his repeated offers of marriage. She eventually returns his love ( Gaudy Night ) and marries him ( Busman's Honeymoon ). Character biography [ edit ] Harriet Vane was born in 1903, [ 1 ] the only daughter of a country doctor. She was an undergraduate at Shrewsbury College , Oxford (based on Sayers' own Somerville College , [ 2 ] the location of which is given as the Balliol College Sports Grounds, now partly occupied by a residential annexe, on Holywell Street) and took a First in English. Her parents both died while she was quite young and she was left to make her own fortune at the age of 23. She has had some success as a writer of detective stories, living and socialising with other artists in Bloomsbury . She begins a relationship with Philip Boyes, a more literary but far less successful writer who professes not to believe in marriage, and she agrees to live with him without marrying. After a year of this arrangement, Boyes believes that she truly loves him and proposes marriage. Angered by his hypocrisy and aghast at being offered marriage as "a good-conduct prize", Harriet breaks off the relationship. Boyes dies soon afterwards of arsenic poisoning – the method Harriet had researched for her new book. She is arrested and tried for murdering Boyes. Wimsey comes to her rescue by proving who really poisoned Boyes. The murder trial and acquittal make Harriet notorious. Sales of her books skyrocket. Wimsey continues to pursue her romantically, but Harriet repeatedly declines marriage on the principle that gratitude is not a good basis for it. To relax, she takes a walking tour, during which she finds a corpse on a beach, adding to her notoriety. The press is naturally interested; Wimsey hastens to the scene, after receiving a tip from a journalist friend, to help shield Harriet from suspicion and negative press coverage. The two investigate the death and unmask the murderer. The novel makes it clear that they are intellectually and socially compatible, but that Harriet is too emotionally scarred to entertain Wimsey's offer of marriage. A few years later, in 1935, Harriet returns to her old Oxford college for a reunion (or Gaudy ) and is later asked to investigate some strange occurrences there. She protests that she is not a sleuth, and recommends that the college hire professional detectives. However, failing to reach either Miss Climpson , at the female detective agency set up by Wimsey, or Wimsey himself, she agrees to assist the college. Her cover is research into Sheridan Le Fanu (in the books spelled Lefanu ), an Anglo-Irish writer of Gothic tales and mystery novels of the 19th century. (In Thrones, Dominations , the Authors' Note – plural, since the novel was finished posthumously by another author – states that Vane published a monograph on Le Fanu in 1946.) After months of unpleasant incidents at the college and with no solution in sight, Harriet turns once again to Wimsey for help. By the end of the book the villain has been discovered and Harriet has finally accepted Wimsey's proposal. The press is delighted to have a woman once accused of murder engaged to a duke's son, and chases them relentlessly about the wedding. To escape the press, Wimsey and Vane have a quiet wedding in Oxford with no notice to the press, and leave for a quite honeymoon at Talboys, a Tudor farmhouse in North Hertfordshire which Harriet had admired as a child and which Peter has given her as a wedding present. The body of the former owner is discovered in the cellar, leading them to have a "Busman's Honeymoon," described by Sayers as a love story with detective interruptions. Thrones, Dominations , a novel abandoned by Sayers and finished by Jill Paton Walsh , is set in and around London, shortly after Wimsey and Vane return from their honeymoon. The first of their children is born in the story "The Haunted Policeman". By the time of the short story "Talboys", they have three sons: Bredon Delagardie Peter Wimsey (born in October 1936), Paul Wimsey (born 1938), and Roger Wimsey (born 1940 or 1941). [ 3 ] Chronologically between the two are The Wimsey Papers , a series of epistolary articles Sayers wrote for The Spectator at the beginning of World War II . Jill Paton Walsh referenced The Wimsey Papers in writing A Presumption of Death , set at the beginning of the Second World War, in which Harriet takes a leading role. Sayers told friends orally that Harriet and Peter Wimsey were to have five children in all, though she did not disclose the names and sexes of the two youngest children. [ 4 ] However, Paton Walsh did not follow this part of the Sayers heritage, and in her Wimsey books no further children come after the original three. Fictional works by Harriet Vane [ edit ] This section does not cite any sources . Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed . ( June 2025 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) The following is a list of works mentioned by Dorothy Sayers and/or Jill Paton Walsh in their novels. The protagonist in most of the books is private sleuth Robert Templeton. Blades of Hatred in Chapter 8 of The Late Scholar . Curiosity Killed the Cat in chapter 13 of Busman’s Honeymoon . Possibly as a joke. Death ‘Twixt Wind and Water in Chapter 11 of Gaudy Night ; Chapter 10 of Thrones, Dominations , and Chapter 10 of The Late Scholar . Death in the Pot in Chapter 4 of A Presumption of Death . The Fountain Pen Mystery in Chapter 1 of Have His Carcase ; Chapter 17 of The Attenbury Emeralds ; chapter 4 of A Presumption of Death . Murder by Degrees in Chapter 1 of Have His Carcase ; Chapter 4 of Presumption of Death ; Chapter 9 of The Late Scholar . The Sands of Crime in chapter 1 of Gaudy Night . Sheridan Le Fanu Monograph in Thrones, Dominations , Author’s Note. In Gaudy Night , its tentative title is given as Study of Le Fanu . Three short stories are mentioned in chapter 14 of Busman’s Honeymoon . A novel set in Carcassonne and one set in Madrid in the first chapter of Have His Carcase . Series of short stories set in Berlin in the first chapter of Have His Carcase . Influences [ edit ] Sayers consciously modelled Vane on herself, although perhaps not as closely as her fans (and even friends) sometimes thought. Some view Vane as a stand-in for the author, although Vane has many more faults than most such characters . Sayers was among the first generation of women to receive an Oxford education, graduating BA with first-class honours in 1915 and as an MA in 1920. She gave Harriet Vane, too, an Oxford education. Vane's relationship with Boyes has many similarities with Sayers' love affair (1921–1922) with the author John Cournos (1881–1966), a Russian-born American Jew. [ 5 ] Biographers note that Sayers' later relationship with Bill White and her marriage to the fellow writer Oswald Atherton "Mac" Fleming provide grist for Vane's struggle to balance love (and perhaps marriage to Wimsey) and her work. After Sayers' affairs with Cournos and White were revealed, the comparisons between Sayers and Vane became more emphatic. (Neither of these affairs was publicly known during Sayers' lifetime.) McGregor and Lewis suggest that some of Vane's and Wimsey's observations about mystery in story versus real life – though in the context of a mystery story – reflect Sayers' sense of fun and ability to laugh with her characters. Bibliography [ edit ] Books by Dorothy L. Sayers [ edit ] Strong Poison (1930) Have His Carcase (1932) Gaudy Night (1936) Busman's Honeymoon (1937) (As Lady Peter Wimsey) In the Teeth of the Evidence (1939) (editions published after 1942 usually add Talboys , the last story Sayers wrote to feature Lord and Lady Peter Wimsey) Books by Jill Paton Walsh [ edit ] Thrones, Dominations (1998) by Dorothy L. Sayers and Jill Paton Walsh (as Lady Peter Wimsey) A Presumption of Death (2002) by Jill Paton Walsh (as Lady Peter Wimsey) The Attenbury Emeralds (2010) by Jill Paton Walsh (as Lady Peter Wimsey) The Late Scholar (2013) by Jill Paton Walsh (as Duchess of Denver) Portrayal in film, TV or theatre [ edit ] This section does not cite any sources . Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed . ( June 2025 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Harriet Vane was portrayed by Constance Cummings in a 1940 film adaptation of Busman's Honeymoon (US: The Haunted Honeymoon ), with Robert Montgomery as Peter Wimsey. However, the film bore little resemblance to Sayers' writing, and she refused to see it. Vane was voiced by Sarah Badel in a BBC Radio 4 serialization of 'Busman's Honeymoon' in 1983 and was played by Harriet Walter in the 1987 BBC television adaptations of Strong Poison , Have his Carcase and Gaudy Night and by Emily Richard in the 1988 stage adaptation of Busman's Honeymoon at The Lyric Theatre, Hammersmith. In a 2005 BBC audio production of Gaudy Night , Harriet Vane was played by Joanna David . References [ edit ] Citations ↑ Scowcroft, Philip L. “HARRIET VANE’S BIRTHDAY.” Sidelights on Sayers 15 (1985): 16–18. http://www.jstor.org/stable/45305469 . ↑ Somerville Stories – Dorothy L Sayers Archived 5 October 2013 at the Wayback Machine , Somerville College, University of Oxford , UK. ↑ A Presumption of Death, Ch 1 ↑ Reynolds (1993), p. 340 ↑ caroline (10 June 2020). "Dorothy's Secret Transcript" . Shedunnit . Retrieved 14 January 2024 . Bibliography Reynolds, Barbara (1998). Dorothy L. Sayers: Her Life and Soul . Sceptre. ISBN 978-0-340-72845-1 . Robert Kuhn McGregor; Ethan Lewis (January 2000). Conundrums for the Long Week-end: England, Dorothy L. Sayers, and Lord Peter Wimsey . Kent State University Press. ISBN 978-0-87338-665-4 . James Brabazon (1981) Dorothy L. Sayers: A Biography Strong Poison - Ian Carmichael stars in the BBC's 1976 series v t e Lord Peter Wimsey stories by Dorothy L. Sayers Characters Lord Peter Wimsey Harriet Vane Mervyn Bunter Miss Climpson Charles Parker Duke of Denver (family title) Novels Whose Body? (1923) Clouds of Witness (1926) Unnatural Death (1927) The Unpleasantness at the Bellona Club (1928) Strong Poison (1931) The Five Red Herrings (1931) Have His Carcase (1932) Murder Must Advertise (1933) The Nine Tailors (1934) Gaudy Night (1935) Busman's Honeymoon (1937) Short story collections Lord Peter Views the Body (1928) Hangman's Holiday (1933) " The Image in the Mirror " In the Teeth of the Evidence (1939) Striding Folly (1972) Lord Peter (1972) The Wimsey Papers (1939-1940) Continuations by Jill Paton Walsh Thrones, Dominations (1998; based on unfinished manuscript by Sayers) A Presumption of Death (2002) The Attenbury Emeralds (2010) The Late Scholar (2013) Adaptations The Silent Passenger (1935 film) Busman's Honeymoon (1940 film) Lord Peter Wimsey (1972 television series) Lord Peter Wimsey (1973 radio series) A Dorothy L. Sayers Mystery (1987 television series) Authority control databases International FAST National United States Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Harriet_Vane&oldid=1368948156 " Categories : Characters of the Golden Age of Detective Fiction Fictional writers Dorothy L. Sayers characters Female characters in literature Literary characters introduced in 1930 Lord Peter Wimsey characters Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from December 2020 All articles needing additional references Use British English from September 2013 All Wikipedia articles written in British English Use dmy dates from May 2024 Webarchive template wayback links Articles needing additional references from June 2025 This page was last edited on 12 August 2026, at 01:09 (UTC) . Page was rendered with Parsoid . Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc. , a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Legal & safety contacts Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Harriet Vane Add languages Add topic 