Abduction > Peirce on Abduction (Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy)
Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy
Menu
Browse
Table of Contents
What's New
Random Entry
Chronological
Archives
About
Editorial Information
About the SEP
Editorial Board
How to Cite the SEP
Special Characters
Advanced Tools
Contact
Support SEP
Support the SEP
PDFs for SEP Friends
Make a Donation
SEPIA for Libraries
Entry Navigation
Back to Entry
Entry Contents
Entry Bibliography
Academic Tools
Friends PDF Preview
Author and Citation Info
Back to Top
Supplement to
Abduction
Peirce on Abduction
The term “abduction” was coined by Charles Sanders Peirce
in his work on the logic of science. He introduced it to denote a type
of non-deductive inference that was different from the already
familiar inductive type. It is a common complaint that no coherent
picture emerges from Peirce’s writings on abduction. (Though
perhaps this is not surprising, given that he worked on abduction
throughout his career, which spanned a period of more than fifty
years. For a concise yet thorough account of the development of
Peirce’s thoughts about abduction, see Fann 1970.) Yet it is
clear that, as Peirce understood the term, “abduction” did
not quite mean what it is currently taken to mean (see Campos 2011 and
McAuliffe 2015). One main difference between his conception and the
modern one is that, whereas according to the latter, abduction belongs
to what the logical empiricists called the “context of
justification”—the stage of scientific inquiry in which we
are concerned with the assessment of theories—for Peirce
abduction had its proper place in the context of discovery, the stage
of inquiry in which we try to generate theories which may then later
be assessed. As he says, “[a]bduction is the process of forming
explanatory hypotheses. It is the only logical operation which
introduces any new idea” (CP 5.172); elsewhere he says that
abduction encompasses “all the operations by which theories and
conceptions are engendered” (CP 5.590). Deduction and induction,
then, come into play at the later stage of theory assessment:
deduction helps to derive testable consequences from the explanatory
hypotheses that abduction has helped us to conceive, and induction
finally helps us to reach a verdict on the hypotheses, where the
nature of the verdict is dependent on the number of testable
consequences that have been verified. (As an aside, it is to be noted
that Gerhard Schurz has recently defended a view of abduction that is
again very much in the Peircean spirit. On this view, “the
crucial function of a pattern of abduction … consists in its
function as a search strategy which leads us, for a given kind of
scenario, in a reasonable time to a most promising explanatory
conjecture which is then subject to further test” (Schurz 2008,
205). The paper is also of interest because of the useful typology of
patterns of abduction that it puts forth.)
As Harry Frankfurt (1958) has noted, however, the foregoing view is
not as easy to make sense of as might at first appear. Abduction is
supposed to be part of the logic of science, but what exactly is
logical
about inventing explanatory hypotheses? According to
Peirce (CP 5.189), abduction belongs to logic because it can be given
a schematic characterization, to wit, the following:
The surprising fact,
C
, is observed.
But if
A
were true,
C
would be a matter of course.
Hence, there is reason to suspect that
A
is true.
But Frankfurt rightly remarks that this is not an inference leading to
any new idea. After all, the new idea—the explanatory hypothesis
A
—must have occurred to one
before
one infers
that there is reason to suspect that
A
is true, for
A
already figures in the second premise.
Frankfurt then goes on to argue that a number of passages in
Peirce’s work suggest an understanding of abduction not so much
as a process of
inventing
hypotheses but rather as one of
adopting
hypotheses, where the adoption of the hypothesis is
not as being true or verified or confirmed, but as being a worthy
candidate for further investigation. On this understanding, abduction
could still be thought of as being part of the context of discovery.
It would work as a kind of selection function, or filter, determining
which of the hypotheses that have been conceived in the stage of
discovery are to pass to the next stage and be subjected to empirical
testing. The selection criterion is that there must be a reason to
suspect that the hypothesis is true, and we will have such a reason if
the hypothesis makes whichever observed facts we are interested in
explaining a matter of course. This would indeed make better sense of
Peirce’s claim that abduction is a logical operation.
Nevertheless, Frankfurt ultimately rejects this proposal as well.
Given, he says, that there may be infinitely many hypotheses that
account for a given fact or set of facts—which Peirce
acknowledged—it can hardly be a sufficient condition for the
adoption of a hypothesis (in the above sense) that its truth would
make that fact or set of facts a matter of course. At a minimum,
abduction would not seem to be of much use as a selection function.
One may doubt whether this is a valid objection, however. Echoing what
was said in connection with underdetermination arguments, we note that
it is by no means clear that “accounting for a given fact”
is to be identified with “making that fact a matter of
course.” For all Frankfurt says, for a hypothesis to account for
a fact, it is enough if it entails that fact. But virtually no
philosopher of science nowadays holds that entailment is sufficient
for explanation. And it would seem reasonable to read the phrase
“making a given fact a matter of course” as “giving
a satisfactory explanation of that fact.” In response to
Frankfurt’s objection, it could thus be argued that even if
there is an infinity of hypotheses that account for a given fact,
there may still be only a handful that could be said to give a
satisfactory explanation of it. But it is for Peirce scholars to
decide whether this proposed interpretation is plausible in the light
of Peirce’s further writings.
Even if “making a given fact a matter of course” can be
read as “giving a satisfactory explanation of that fact,”
it is remarkable that there is no reference in Peirce’s writings
on abduction to the notion of
best
explanation. Some
satisfactory explanations might still be better than others, and there
might even be a unique best one. This idea is crucial in all recent
thinking about abduction. Therein lies another main difference between
Peirce’s conception of abduction and the modern one.
Copyright © 2025
by
Igor Douven
<
igor
.
douven
@
paris-sorbonne
.
fr
>
Open access to the SEP is made possible by a world-wide funding initiative.
The Encyclopedia Now Needs Your Support
Please Read How You Can Help Keep the Encyclopedia Free
Browse
Table of Contents
What's New
Random Entry
Chronological
Archives
About
Editorial Information
About the SEP
Editorial Board
How to Cite the SEP
Special Characters
Advanced Tools
Accessibility
Contact
Support SEP
Support the SEP
PDFs for SEP Friends
Make a Donation
SEPIA for Libraries
Mirror Sites
View this site from another server:
USA (Main Site)
Philosophy, Stanford University
Info about mirror sites
The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy is
copyright © 2025
by
The Metaphysics Research Lab
, Department of Philosophy, Stanford University
Library of Congress Catalog Data: ISSN 1095-5054
$('.dropdown-toggle').dropdown();